zGEM Meta file    *.GEM

Files ending in '.GEM' are graphic metafiles created by GDOS. They are usually
used to represent vector graphics but may also be used to store links to bitmap
images and textual information. Two primary versions of GEM files exist.
Version 1 files are guaranteed not to contain bezier curves whereas version 3
files may. Version 3.xx files are also commonly referred to as GEM/3 files.

The Metafile Header (see META_HEADER structure)

GEM metafiles begin with a header as follows:

WORD    Contents
  0     Magic number (0xFFFF).
  1     Header length in WORDs.
  2     Version number (major * 100 + minor).
  3     NDC Flag as follows: Value Meaning 0 (0, 0) in lower-left corner (NDC)
                                           2 (0, 0) in upper-left corner (RC)
  4     Minimum X extent.
  5     Minimum Y extent.
  6     Maximum X extent.
  7     Maximum Y extent.
  8     Page width in tenths of millimeters.
  9     Page height in tenths of millimeters.
 10     Lower Left X value of coordinate system.
 11     Lower Left Y value of coordinate system.
 12     Upper Right X value of coordinate system.
 13     Upper Right Y value of coordinate system.
 ...    Other information may appear in the header following which is
        currently undefined. Use WORD #1 to skip any unknown information.

The definition of WORDs 4-13 is defined by the creator of the file using three
metafile commands. WORDs 4-7 are set with the v_meta_extents() function. WORDs
8-9 are defined with the vm_pagesize() function. WORDs 10-13 are defined with
vm_coords(). If the creator fails to specify defaults for any of these values,
the appropriate values will be set to 0 in the header. If zeros appear for
WORDs 10-13, the default NDC coordinate system should be assumed.

Metafile Records:

Following the header will appear a list of records of varying length which,
when translated, can be 'played back' on the destination VDI device. Each
record is formatted as follows:

        WORD    Meaning
        0       Opcode of VDI function.
        1       Number of PTSIN elements.
        2       Number of INTIN elements.
        3       Function sub-ID.
        4...    PTSIN elements.
        ...     INTIN elements.

The list of records is terminated with an opcode of 0xFFFF (this record is
written when a v_clswk() call is made by the creator). When playing back GEM
files, the application must translate all coordinates from the metafile
coordinate system to that of the destination device. In addition, text metrics
should be appropriately converted. If an unknown opcode is discovered it should
be played after any elements of the PTSIN array are translated (making the
assumption that they should be).

Metafile Sub-Opcodes:

GEM metafiles support the use of special sub-opcodes for implementing reserved
and user-defined functions. GEM metafile translators should ignore sub-opcodes
they don't understand. Each sub-opcode can be identified with the primary
opcode of 5, function ID of 99 and the first (required) member of INTIN being
the sub-opcode ID. The currently defined sub-opcodes are as follows:

      INTIN[0]  Meaning
      10        Start Group.
      11        End Group.
      49        Set No Line Style.
      50        Set Attribute Shadow On.
      51        Set Attribute Shadow Off.
      80        Start Draw Area Type Primitive.
      81        End Draw Area Type Primitive.

None of the pre-defined sub-opcodes use additional INTIN or PTSIN elements
though user-defined sub-opcodes may.

Opcodes from 0-100 are reserved for use by Atari. Sub-opcodes from 101-65535
are available for use by developers but should be registered with Atari to
avoid possible conflicts.
